Before we begin,
there's something I want to tell you
about the First Amendment.
It wasn't really the first.
The first Congress actually
didn't list freedom of speech and of the press first.
It actually listed it third on the list.
But the first two amendments
didn't get ratified by the states.
It's a happy coincidence
because speech and press are really, in some deep sense,
perhaps the most important freedoms.
It's really hard to write a constitution.
Our own Constitution wasn't the framers' first attempt.
Remember the Articles of Confederation?
After the Constitution was ratified in 1789,
the framers added 10 amendments in the first two years,
and even then, they weren't sure they had it right.
When you read letters from the time period,
they'll say things like,
well, if the government's still here in five years,
here's what I think we should do.
Experience leaves its mark on a constitution.
So when you look at the First Amendment's freedom of speech
and freedom of the press...
"Congress shall make no law
abridging the freedom of speech or of the press."
It looks cut and dried:
"No law" means no law, right?
Well, not quite.
As it turns out, our idea of free speech and a free press
has changed a lot over the years.
This is the story of how time and experience
turned these fundamental rights into what they are today –
and what the framers only imagined they could be.
Today, they're absolutely bedrock.
Everyone believes in free speech and free press,
but it wasn't always so.
OK, so imagine what life here
was like before the Constitution.
No "We the people," no right to free speech,
much less a free press.
Why?
Because the people didn't rule the colonies.
The king ruled.
And what the people thought was not of interest to the king.

The colonists felt very strongly
that one of the freedoms that was denied to them by the king
was the ability to speak out.
They wanted the freedom to be able to speak out
and object to their government.
They wanted to be able to protest.
They wanted to be able to communicate with one another.
During the revolutionary era, they clearly had a lot to say,
and they had a lot to say that the king would not have liked.
And as the Revolutionary War began,
a free press –
this thing, churning out sheets of paper filled with ideas.
Ideas can be powerful,
and they were just as dangerous to the king as any gun.
The crown was really trying to stop them
from expressing revolutionary ideas
and talking to each other
and assembling and getting their revolution going.
All the protest literature was against the law.
The king had a couple of ways
of shutting down the press.
He could shut down presses before they printed ideas.
This is known as "prior restraint."
A prior restraint is kind of, you know,
putting a gag on somebody before they ever talk.
So anyone who wanted to use a printing press,
basically, had to bring their newspaper, their book,
their pamphlet to a government licensor,
who would read through it, excise anything in there
that they thought was inappropriate,
which meant critical of the government in any way.
This had been banned in England in the 17th century.
But when the king's rule was threatened by war,
the British government used prior restraint
to try to quiet the revolutionary press.
And if he couldn't shut them down before they spoke,
the king could prosecute revolutionaries
after they said anything critical of the government.
This has a technical name you'll want to remember:
"seditious libel."
Seditious libel is defined as
speaking ill of the government.
It's a crime to criticize the government.
All power was in the king and Parliament.
And they couldn't be questioned.
But the king lost the war.
And when the framers wrote the Bill of Rights,
they remembered how important the press had been
to winning their freedom.
They were accustomed to the idea
that criticizing the government is a good thing to do.
That became part of their idea
of what it means to be in a democracy.
In a democracy, where the idea is
that the people would have the authority
to select their leaders,
then it was important for the people
to actually know what the government was doing.
Democracy depends on an informed citizenry.
In order for democracy to function effectively
and to function with integrity,
the public needs to know what's going on.
So the First Amendment says
the government can't stop us from expressing ourselves.
The First Amendment
carries these core principles that are all necessary
in order for people to find their voice in a democracy.
It includes both freedom of speech
and freedom of the press.
The freedom of speech
protects us when we talk to each other,
when we give speeches, and we put ideas forward.
The press is an institutional means
for spreading those ideas to a large number of people.
So the freedom of speech and press work together.
Individual speakers could all, of course,
give speeches and hand out leaflets and so on.
But they saw the press as a more important player,
in an institutional sense, in American democracy
and in a better position to keep the government honest.
Because the press had the capacity to use resources
to learn information and to convey information
in a broader way than an individual speaker could.
And the First Amendment protects
both speech and the press from the government.
It says that the government can't tell you to shut up
because it doesn't like what you're saying.
So the First Amendment was ratified,
and we've had total freedom of the press ever since,
and this is the shortest civics film you've ever had to watch.

Um, no.
In fact, the men who wrote and then ratified
freedom of speech and freedom of the press
were the very first ones to try to undo them.
When the government goes into motion in the 1790s,
there's still a lot of debate
about exactly what the Constitution means
and exactly how far this new government can go.
So they're arguing as to what the Constitution means
and these are the people who wrote it.
After George Washington left office,
some of the framers tried to limit free speech and the press
because they were afraid of war.
The Alien and Sedition Act
was signed into law by President Adams in 1798.

He is the leader of essentially a house divided.

France was growing in power,
and as it threatened Europe and the U.S.,
fear of war increased tension
between the two new political parties at home.
President John Adams, a Federalist,
signed the Alien and Sedition Acts into law.
He was afraid the French might topple
the young U.S. government
with the help of the Democratic Republicans,
led by his vice president, Thomas Jefferson.
The Sedition Act
basically made it a federal crime
to criticize the president.
The act made it a federal crime to criticize Congress.
Now interestingly,
it wasn't a federal crime to criticize the vice president,
who was the head of the other political party.
Remember, back in those days,
the president and vice president
were the top two vote-getters in each election,
so they were rivals, not from the same party.
The Sedition Act protected only one party
and punished the other.
And the Adams administration
felt that the Jeffersonians favored the French.
And they called them disloyal.
The way the act was used
was exclusively to prosecute Republican critics
of the Adams administration.
Like Congressman Matthew Lyon,
who spent four months in prison for criticizing the president.
This is ridiculous.
This is a gross violation of the First Amendment idea,
of the free speech idea.
You can't have a law
that makes it a crime to bring the government
or the president or the Congress
into contempt or disrepute.
That's what the First Amendment's about.
So, you might want to ask about now,
where were the courts?
Why didn't they set things straight?
Well, at this point in American history,
the courts had yet to overturn a federal law.
In fact, the entire concept of courts stepping in
to fix federal laws, what we call "judicial review,"
wasn't established in the Supreme Court
until Marbury v. Madison.
So Congressman Lyon and the others in prison
were out of luck.
But a funny thing happened with the press and the Sedition Act.
The funny thing that happened
is that it didn't quell dissent.
In fact, dissent from the opposition party increased.

During the two-and-a-half years
that the Sedition Act was in effect,
the number of opposition newspapers doubled.
Voters threw John Adams out of office
in the bitter election of 1800, largely because they disliked
his interpretation of the First Amendment.
So it was a long time before another president thought
that limiting free speech was a good idea.
Jump ahead over 100 years to World War I
and President Woodrow Wilson.
This time, the president and Congress
passed the Espionage Act of 1917 and the Sedition Act of 1918,

saying Americans can't interfere with the government's ability
to draft people into the military.
But their effect was greater than that.
The laws were used in a way
that suppressed speech and punished people
who were merely dissenting against government policy,
how the war was being conducted.
Thousands of people were arrested and put in prison
for hampering the draft by speaking against it.
The most famous was Eugene V. Debs.
Debs, a Socialist, had been a candidate for president
in a previous election.
He was a nationally known figure.
A man who gets a million votes,
a million votes running for president,
gets up and makes a speech
saying that he thinks World War I is a bad war.
And he is prosecuted under the Sedition Act
and he's imprisoned.
Debs was sentenced to 10 years in prison
for giving a speech.
The courts sent people to prison for speech considered dangerous
because it might cause a bad reaction.
By this time, there was judicial review,
so the Supreme Court heard cases challenging these laws.
And in each case, the court sided with the government.
In the first of those cases,
a case called Schenck v. United States,
the Supreme Court,
in an opinion by Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes,
unanimously upheld the conviction of individuals
who had handed out a bunch of leaflets criticizing the draft.
The Supreme Court embarked on
a very repressive interpretation of the First Amendment.
It was Justice Holmes' "clear and present danger" test.
Justice Holmes argued
that lowering morale for the draft
presented "a clear and present danger" to the nation
and that the First Amendment
did not protect free speech at all costs.
"No law" didn't always mean no law.
Justice Holmes said suppose someone yells "Fire"
in a crowded theater when he knows there's no fire
and people are trampled running to the exits.
Are you really saying he can't be punished for this?
Holmes says of course not.
So the First Amendment obviously can't mean
what it superficially appears to say.
Only a week later,
the court ruled against Eugene Debs.
The Supreme Court
unanimously upholds his conviction.
Another opinion by Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes
that was in the front page of every paper
in the United States.
The Schenck case, the Debs case,
ultimately had the U.S. Supreme Court
giving its stamp of approval
upon the criminalization of dissent.
But then something amazing happened.
The Debs decision got a lot of people
thinking about what freedom of speech
and freedom of the press really meant during wartime.
Among them was Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes.
And that fall, he argued in a famous dissent
that actually, free expression during wartime
shouldn't be prosecuted, but protected.
And so you get this extraordinary moment of pivoting
in which Holmes suddenly wakes up.
And for the first time, we have this strong,
eloquent statement by Holmes that basically begins,
for the first time,
to articulate the meaning of freedom of speech
and freedom of the press in this country.
Joined by Justice Louis Brandeis,
they influenced court rulings on the First Amendment
for the rest of the century.
We have to protect people who dissent.
There's a marketplace of ideas out there,
even ideas that challenge basic things in our society,

and everybody has to have their opportunity
to change the mind of the nation.
The position of Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes
and the position that Justice Louis Brandeis took
in subsequent cases gradually and eventually becomes law.
Over the next 50 years,
the court moved away from
government suppressing free speech
back to the idea that free speech
is a vital way to check the government.
What you see are the justices
going back in time to a fundamental recognition

that the founding generation kind of had the right idea,
that dissent, the protests,
was something that enabled us to break away
and start our own nation.
The court has come full circle.
They learn it with hindsight.
They looked back at what happened in World War I.
That was crazy.
In the same way that after 1800,
people looked back on the Sedition Act of 1798
and said: What were we doing?
This was not necessary.
We completely allowed ourselves to exaggerate the danger
and to restrict fundamental freedoms in a democracy

because we were not acting calmly and carefully.
So on a summer Sunday in June 1971,
when Daniel Ellsberg bought a stack of copies
of the New York Times,
the front page made him very happy.
No, not the story about
President Nixon's daughter getting married.
This one, to the right.
There had been a leak,
and a top-secret U.S. government document
was now being trumpeted as a headline
on the front page of the New York Times.
Daniel Ellsberg was the leak,
in fact, more like a flash flood.
Ellsberg had given the New York Times
a 7,000-page report that became known as
the Pentagon Papers.
The Pentagon Papers
was a multivolume work
by individuals in the Department of Defense
that would tell the story of how decisions were made,
who made them to navigate the war in Vietnam.
A history of all that the U.S. had done right
and all that the U.S. had done wrong,
with the benefit of hindsight.
And Daniel Ellsberg,
who was someone who worked in the Department of Defense
and who was a strong advocate of the Vietnam War,
came around to a different point of view.
Daniel Ellsberg had been in the Marines for a while.
He had served in Vietnam.
He had been in favor of the war.
Ellsberg was involved with creating the report.
And the more he learned,
the more Ellsberg believed that the government had lied
about why it went to war in Vietnam
and that its policies were covering up the fact
that the U.S. was losing the war.
That report revealed some of the sins of the policy.
The Pentagon Papers revealed
that the American people had been lied to
in a variety of very significant ways
that had manipulated them into being more sympathetic
to our role in Vietnam than they might have been
had they known the truth.
Daniel Ellsberg wanted the American people
to have this information
so they could know what their government was doing.
But the report was classified "top secret."
The way the classification system works,
the highest level of classification of a document,
the most secret document, is the one which determines
how the whole document would be labeled.
So all 7,000 pages of the Pentagon Papers
were classified "top secret,"
even though it wasn't information
that endangered troops.
But some of it was deeply embarrassing
to the government and our allies.
Daniel Ellsberg secretly photocopied every page.
First, he tried to get members of Congress
to make the report available to the public.
And they basically say:
Classified information is classified.
We see no reason to regard anything you've told us

as justifying violating the rules against publishing
and disclosing classified information.
When they did not do that, he went to the press.
He turned them over to the New York Times
and basically said: Now you know the truth.

Make it public.
And after months of poring over
each photocopied page,
that's exactly what the New York Times did.
Right there on its front page:
Secrets revealing that the government
had not told the truth to the American people
about the war in Vietnam.
And it was only the first article.
The Times announced it would publish
an entire series of articles about the Pentagon Papers.

At first, President Richard M. Nixon
was slow to respond.
The Pentagon Papers covered the four administrations
before President Nixon,
so they didn't reveal secrets specifically about
his administration. Still ...

Over the first 48 hours,
different aides told the president
the Times was wrong to publish top-secret information.

And President Nixon ultimately agreed.
The position of the Nixon administration
was that they were betraying the freedom of the press.

After only three days of articles,
the Nixon administration convinced the courts
to stop the Times
from publishing any more installments.
What Richard Nixon's administration
did was historically unprecedented.
They went into federal court
asking federal judges to issue an order
stopping publication of the Pentagon Papers.
The New York Times was enjoined,
it was stopped, from reporting the rest of the story.

Ellsberg was undaunted.
He ultimately succeeded in getting the Washington Post
to publish the story.
And the courts stopped the Post from publishing.
But Daniel Ellsberg didn't stop, and neither did the press.
Across the country, newspapers began publishing
what the Times and the Post couldn't,
as the Times and the Post headed to the Supreme Court.
The Court heard and decided the case in only four days.
The most rapidly expedited case in American history.
On June 30th, 1971, the Supreme Court ruled
that the government could not prevent newspapers
from publishing the Pentagon Papers.
They didn't have time to write together,
so each justice wrote his own opinion,
breaking down into a 6 to 3 majority.
The majority told the government that even in wartime,
it could not stop the press from publishing
unless it really jeopardized lives or the nation's security.
And amazingly, what the Supreme Court holds
is that the government cannot stop them for a moment,
unless the government can prove
that the publication of the information
will create a clear and present danger of grave harm
to the nation.
Justice William 0. Douglas wrote
that "open debate and discussion of public issues
are vital to our national health,"
even if revealing secrets "may have a serious impact."
It was really the first time that the Supreme Court came out
explicitly during a time of national crisis
and said that we have to draw a line here.
The people need to know about that.
In dissent, Justice Harry Blackmun warned
that the decision could lead to "the death of soldiers,
the destruction of alliances ...
and the inability of our diplomats to negotiate."
And the dissenters
in the Pentagon Papers case say, basically: What, are you crazy?
This makes no sense at all.
All the government wants to do here
is to have time to give us an opportunity
to know what the risks are.
Now, it turns out that the truth is,
when all the dust settled,
nothing published in the Pentagon Papers
would satisfy the standard of clear and present danger,
of imminent harm.
The Pentagon Papers case
was an extraordinary triumph in reaffirming
some of our most essential First Amendment values.
After almost 200 years,
the court held the government accountable
to those First Amendment values.
Freedom of speech and freedom of the press
are the priority, even during wartime.
So the difference between
what the Court did in World War I
and what the Court does here is about as night and day
as one could ever imagine, right,
a complete 180-degree change in its willingness
to step in and say, We are going to enforce
the First Amendment with a vengeance.
It's not a decision that comes out of the blue, right?
There's an evolution in the doctrine.
And technology is also evolving.
Today, just about anyone can publish.
Daniel Ellsberg had 7,000 pages of the Pentagon Papers,
and in order to get it out there to the public,
he had to make copies of it
and give it to newspaper editors.
I mean, you can put the entire Pentagon Papers
on a thumb drive and upload it yourself to a website.
But the decision in the Pentagon Papers case
continues to protect the press.
The press can be critical,
and the government can't tell it what or what not to publish.

The First Amendment, the deep idea is,
don't trust government to make that decision.
Voters should make that decision for themselves.
Readers should make that decision for themselves.
Ordinary citizens,
we the people, can decide for ourselves.
The freedom of the press
is an extraordinarily important aspect of the First Amendment.
And it's important because
the Constitution works on a checks-and-balances system.
But there's another part of the equation
and that really is the people.
The people are really the fourth branch of government.
You have to know what the government is doing.